Type system update (#1366)
Greater-London-Authority/ldn-viz-tools: packages/ui/src/lib/Typography.mdx

# Typography

> A developer's guide to applying type in our apps, components and charts. It covers the parts you touch: role utilities, context, weight, colour and vertical rhythm. The full rationale, the primitive scale and the composition rules live in the design system specification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the full rationale, and details of the primitive scale and composition rules, consult the design system specification.
```

## The one rule

**Bind to a role, never to a size.** Every piece of text has a job — a control label, a card title, an axis tick — and the system already names it. Pick the role and the size, line-height and weight arrive with it.

```html
<!-- do this -->
<h2 class="section-head">Air quality</h2>
<p class="body-sm">Rolling 24-hour mean.</p>

<!-- not this -->
<h2 class="text-3xl font-semibold">Air quality</h2>
```

Two things that follow from it:

> - **Don't reach for Tailwind's `text-*` sizes.** `text-xl`, `text-9xl` and friends are off-system. If a role looks wrong at a given size, the role is probably wrong — check the mapping below before overriding.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Don't use Tailwind's `text-*` size classes.** `text-xl`, `text-9xl` and friends are off-system. If a role looks wrong at a given size, the role is probably wrong — check the mapping below before overriding.
```

| `metric`       | 36   | 700    | Hero stat numerals. Scales.                              |
| `metric-sm`    | 20   | 700    | Secondary stat, in-card KPI                              |
| `body`         | 16   | 400    | Default UI text, field values, menu items                |
| `body-sm`      | 14   | 400    | Helper text, hints, secondary copy, table cells          |
| `label`        | 14   | 500    | Control and nav labels — buttons, inputs, tabs           |
| `label-sm`     | 12   | 500    | Labels in dense contexts, column headers                 |
| `caption`      | 12   | 400    | Metadata, badges, smallest functional text               |

**Resolving by element, not by eye.** These conventions are settled — apply them rather than picking a size:

- Control and nav labels → `label`. This holds where legacy markup used 16px.
- Input values, placeholders, body copy → `body`.
- Helper, hint and secondary text → `body-sm`.
- Genuine component titles (modal, callout, panel, sidebar header) → `title`.
- Sidebar and nav _section_ headings are labels, not titles → `label`.

Migrate off-system legacy sizes to the correct role even when it visibly resizes the element.

> **Tight variants for single-line controls.** `label-tight` / `label-sm-tight` are real Tailwind utilities — same size and weight as `label` / `label-sm`, with `line-height` set to `1` for buttons, tabs and chips that must never wrap. Already in use (`Button`, `TabLabel`, `NavigationMenuItem`, `ThemeSwitcher`, `MultipleActionButton`, `GeocoderSuggestion(List)`). What's missing is a dedicated backing token — they currently reuse `label`/`label-sm`'s vars rather than having their own entry in `semantic-typography`.

Reviewer: > What's missing is a dedicated backing token — they currently reuse `label`/`label-sm`'s vars rather than having their own entry in `semantic-typography`.

Does this need addressing?

## Prose roles

| Role       | Size | Weight | Job                                         |
| ---------- | ---- | ------ | ------------------------------------------- |
| `display`  | 76   | 700    | Homepage hero. Scales.                      |
| `headline` | 56   | 700    | Subpage hero. Scales.                       |
| `subhead`  | 28   | 400    | Companion line under a `headline`           |
| `title-1`  | 36   | 600    | Content h1. Scales.                         |
| `title-2`  | 30   | 600    | Content h2. Scales.                         |
| `title-3`  | 24   | 600    | Content h3. Scales.                         |
| `title-4`  | 20   | 600    | Content h4 — floor of the ladder            |
| `subtitle` | 18   | 400    | Companion line under a content title        |
| `lead`     | 22   | 400    | Intro / standfirst paragraph                |
| `body`     | 16   | 400    | Default reading text                        |
| `body-sm`  | 14   | 400    | Secondary or dense reading text             |
| `caption`  | 12   | 400    | Metadata, smallest text                     |

> | `eyebrow`  | 14   | 500    | Overline above a display, headline or title |

Reviewer: Entries in the "Job" column should consistently end with a full stop.

```suggestion
| Role       | Size | Weight | Job                                         |
| ---------- | ---- | ------ | ------------------------------------------- |
| `display`  | 76   | 700    | Homepage hero. Scales.                      |
| `headline` | 56   | 700    | Subpage hero. Scales.                       |
| `subhead`  | 28   | 400    | Companion line under a `headline`.           |
| `title-1`  | 36   | 600    | Content h1. Scales.                         |
| `title-2`  | 30   | 600    | Content h2. Scales.                         |
| `title-3`  | 24   | 600    | Content h3. Scales.                         |
| `title-4`  | 20   | 600    | Content h4 — floor of the ladder.            |
| `subtitle` | 18   | 400    | Companion line under a content title.        |
| `lead`     | 22   | 400    | Intro / standfirst paragraph.                |
| `body`     | 16   | 400    | Default reading text.                        |
| `body-sm`  | 14   | 400    | Secondary or dense reading text.             |
| `caption`  | 12   | 400    | Metadata, smallest text.                     |
| `eyebrow`  | 14   | 500    | Overline above a display, headline or title. |
```

> **Markdown maps h1–h4 onto `title-1`–`title-4`.** `headline` and `display` are hero chrome and never render a content h1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Markdown maps `<h1>` – `<h4>` onto `title-1`–`title-4`.** `headline` and `display` are hero chrome and never render a content h1.
```

## Chart roles

Charts carry a complete vocabulary so they can be consumed standalone. `title`, `subtitle` and `eyebrow` are aliases of their product equivalents, so they cannot drift.

> 
> | Role         | Size | Weight | Line-height | Job                                                |
> | ------------ | ---- | ------ | ----------- | -------------------------------------------------- |
> | `title`      | 20   | 600    | inherited   | The chart's own title                              |
> | `subtitle`   | 16   | 400    | inherited   | Supporting line under a chart title                |
> | `eyebrow`    | 14   | 500    | inherited   | A chart title that has yielded its slot            |
> | `axis-title` | 14   | 500    | normal      | Axis names, series and legend titles               |
> | `label`      | 14   | 400    | normal      | Data and value labels, annotations, legend entries |
> | `tick`       | 14   | 400    | 1.0         | Axis tick and scale labels                         |
> | `tick-sm`    | 12   | 400    | 1.0         | The smaller tick tier                              |
> | `note`       | 12   | 400    | normal      | Source, citation or footnote in the footer         |
> 

Reviewer: Should have full-stops for consistency with the table above:

```suggestion

| Role         | Size | Weight | Line-height | Job                                                |
| ------------ | ---- | ------ | ----------- | -------------------------------------------------- |
| `title`      | 20   | 600    | inherited   | The chart's own title.                              |
| `subtitle`   | 16   | 400    | inherited   | Supporting line under a chart title.                |
| `eyebrow`    | 14   | 500    | inherited   | A chart title that has yielded its slot.            |
| `axis-title` | 14   | 500    | normal      | Axis names, series and legend titles.               |
| `label`      | 14   | 400    | normal      | Data and value labels, annotations, legend entries. |
| `tick`       | 14   | 400    | 1.0         | Axis tick and scale labels.                         |
| `tick-sm`    | 12   | 400    | 1.0         | The smaller tick tier.                              |
| `note`       | 12   | 400    | normal      | Source, citation or footnote in the footer.         |

```

The t-shirt scale (`mt-xxs`, `p-lg`) and the em-relative `--typography-spacing-*` set are **retired** — not emitted, no live consumers. Straggler mapping: `xxs`→1, `xs`→2, `sm`→3, `md`→4, `lg`→5, `xl`→6, `2xl`→7, `3xl`→8, `4xl`→10, `5xl`→12, `6xl`→14, `7xl`→16, `8xl`→20, `9xl`→24.

Rhythm goes through `flow`; construction — padding, border widths, list indents, cell padding — goes through `--spacing-{n}`.

## Prose columns

Reading columns are width-capped for legibility. `flow-prose` exposes `--readable-width`; bind a column's max-width to it rather than picking a pixel value.

```html
<article class="flow flow-prose">
	<div class="prose-column">…</div>
</article>
```

Images, figures, tables, code blocks and pull quotes may break out wider than the column. That is the intended way to use a wide viewport — widening body text is not.

## The Tailwind `.prose` class

[@ldn-viz/themes](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@ldn-viz/themes) still exposes `.prose` from the [Tailwind Typography plugin](https://github.com/tailwindlabs/tailwindcss-typography).

> **Use it only for HTML you don't control** — markdown output, CMS content. Anywhere you own the markup, including component internals, apply roles and `flow` directly; you get the same result with the hierarchy and rhythm the system actually specifies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Use it only for HTML you don't control**, such as markdown output or CMS content. Anywhere you own the markup, including component internals, apply roles and `flow` directly; you get the same result with the hierarchy and rhythm the system actually specifies.
```
